DT25 Script

Hello! My name is Ben Allen, and I will presenting our datathon project IntrEEGing NEURONets created by Lauren Yu, Jonathan Mak, Ian Rundle, and me. 

Getting right into it, mental disorders are a major worldwide health problem. In fact, they contributed to about ~14.3% of deaths globally last year.

Early and Accurate diagnosis is vital for patients to be given effective treatments and is invaluable to combat any negative effects.

Electro-en-ceph-a-lo-gram or EEG analysis has recently shown promise in classifying mental disorders.

For some background, EEGs are devices that record brainwave activity over time in a non-invasive manner.

They measure the electrical variations of neurons using electrodes that are located at specific places on a patient's head.

This makes it possible to record activity in the all parts of the brain.

With all of this in mind, the objectives of this project are to first, create a model able to accurately classify mental disorders using EEG data.

Secondly, we want to understand further how differences in EEG readings signal different disorders.

Lastly, we aim to determine which if any disorders can be effectively predicted using EEG data.

--- Data Description

Now getting into our data, we had a data set for Nine Hundred and Forty Five patients with One Thousand One Hundred and Forty Eight columns for each patient.

There were a few columns covering things such as age, sex, IQ, and education level; however, the vast majority of the columns contained power spectral density and coherence readings from doing EEG analysis.

To explain Power Spectral Density or PSD further, first image we have placed electrodes on a patients head in the manner shown here.

The power spectral density measures the strength of an EEG signal within a certain frequency band.

Note that EEG signals are originally time series that are typically then converted into the frequency domain and organized based on predetermined bands of frequency shown here. 

The PSD data is divided into different columns based on these frequency bands.

This means that there is a PSD reading for each frequency band and furthermore for each electrode shown here.

In addition to Power Spectral Density, we also have readings for the coherence between two electrodes which measures how synchronized the two electrodes are with each other.

Given this, this Coherence data is separated into columns by a start and end electrode.

--- Data Cleaning & Feature Engineering

Moving on to data cleaning, we dropped 24 rows with missing value. 

Next, we dropped columns not related to the disorders or EEG signals because our approach focused on capturing spatial relationships between these signals. 

Lastly, we standardized the data to remove any effects of scaling from impacting our models.

Next for feature engineering, we attempted various strategies such as using dimensionality reduction techniques like PCA and UMAP. 

Additionally, we tried using SMOTE in order to reduce the amount of class imbalance. 

Ultimately, our best approach used coherence to structure the data as a graph. 

To do this we first found the maximum coherence across frequency bands and made that the weight of each edge.

Next, we took the 10 highest weighted edges and removed all others.

Finally, we used the pytorch-geometric package to construct a weighted graph for use in our graph neural network.

--- Model Architecture

Speaking of graph neural network, we can now get into our model architecture.

For a quick overview, our best model was a convolutional graph neural network.

This model was able to capture the spatial relationships and was made more effective by taking advantage of the natural graph structure of the electrodes.

The model also include flattening and fully connected layers to reshape the data and make final class probability predictions.

--- Insights & Conclusion

Finishing off, the following chart displays the average PSD by frequency band for each main disorder.

We can see from this chart that higher frequency bands such as the gamma band had a highly concentrated power spectral density on the left or right sides of the head for addictive, OCD, and schizophrenic disorders. 

On the other hand, anxiety disorders tended to have lower density of gamma waves in the front of the head compared to the other diagnoses.

There were patterns for some of the mid-frequency bands; for instance, patients with OCD tended to have a higher density of Alpha waves closer to the back of the head.

To conclude, our project resulted in a Graph Neural Network capable of classifying mental disorders with an accuracy of 38.5%!

Future work may look into adding additional features beyond EEG signals to better classify a diverse array of disorders.

Thank you to the Rice Datathon organizers and NeuroTech@Rice for this opportunity, and thank you for watching!













